README.rst, before:

========
speckenv
========

speckenv because a speck is a synonym for a dot and because Speck is awesome.

Usage
=====

Read the settings contained in ``./.env`` into ``os.environ``:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import read_speckenv

    read_speckenv()

Note that ``read_speckenv`` uses ``os.environ.setdefault`` to set new values,
which means that if a particular key exists more than once in the file the
first value is retained, not the last.

If the file is named differently or resides in a different path, pass the
full path as first argument to ``read_speckenv``.

Read individual values:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env

    # Standard usage:
    SETTING1 = env("SETTING1")

    # Fallback, if SETTING2 is not set (truthyness doesn't matter):
    SETTING2 = env("SETTING2", default="bla")

    # Fail hard if missing:
    SETTING3 = env("SETTING3", required=True)

    # Coerce the value before returning it (coercion is also applied to
    # default values):
    SETTING4 = env("SETTING4", coerce=bool)

The following values are evaluated as Python literals::

    BOOL=True  # And False, None etc.
    NUMBER=42
    SWEET_HOME=["localhost", "127.0.0.1"]

Additional whitespace around the equals sign is supported. Empty lines and
lines starting with a ``#`` are ignored::

    THIS_IS_IGNORED
    # COMMENTED_OUT=VALUE
    THIS = WORKS

**NOTE!** You should treat everything except for the first argument to
both ``env`` and ``read_speckenv`` as keyword-only. Since speckenv still
supports Python 2 this isn't enforced by the code right now.

It may be useful to use a mapping separate from ``os.environ``. This is
easily possible by overriding the default mapping argument:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env, read_speckenv

    mapping = {}
    read_speckenv("file_with_variables.env", mapping=mapping)
    setting1 = env("SETTING1", mapping=mapping)


Django support
==============

speckenv comes with a few utilities for configuring Django using environment
variables. Many other projects exist which already do this but
``speckenv_django`` is different in that it only covers interesting settings
and not all of them. Also, the implementation doesn't (needlessly) add monkey
patches to ``urllib.parse``.

speckenv doesn't depend on Django, if you don't want to use Django or the
``speckenv_django`` module you're not paying anything besides a few KiB on the
harddisk.


``django_cache_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring a Redis, locmem or dummy cache backend with optional
authentication credentials. The Redis configuration only supports Django 4 or
better. ``redis://`` and ``hiredis://`` are equivalent since recent enough
versions of redis-py automatically select the hiredis parser if it is
available.

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_cache_url

    # CACHE_URL=hiredis://localhost:6379/1/?key_prefix=example_com"
    CACHES = {"default": django_cache_url(env("DATABASE_URL", default="locmem://"))}
    # NOTE! locmem:// may be a bad default, but that's up to you really.


``django_database_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring a PostgreSQL, PostGIS or sqlite database engine with
authentication credentials.

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_database_url

    # DATABASE_URL=postgres://localhost:5432/example_com
    DATABASES = {"default": django_database_url(env("DATABASE_URL", required=True))}


``django_email_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring an email backend. Known backends are ``smtp://``,
``submission://`` (same as ``smtp://`` but with TLS and a default port of 587),
``locmem://``, ``console://`` and ``dummy:``.

The utility also supports explicitly requesting SSL (``?ssl=true``), TLS
(``?tls=true``), SMTP timeouts (``?timeout=10``) and setting a
``DEFAULT_FROM_EMAIL`` address (``?_default_from_email=info@example.com``)

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_email_url

    # DATABASE_URL=smtp://
    if DEBUG:
        globals().update(django_email_url(env("EMAIL_URL", default="console://")))
    else:
        globals().update(django_email_url(env("EMAIL_URL", default="smtp://")))

Commit message:

Better rationale and description of speckenv_django functions

README.rst, after:

========
speckenv
========

speckenv because a speck is a synonym for a dot and because Speck is awesome.

Usage
=====

Read the settings contained in ``./.env`` into ``os.environ``:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import read_speckenv

    read_speckenv()

Note that ``read_speckenv`` uses ``os.environ.setdefault`` to set new values,
which means that if a particular key exists more than once in the file the
first value is retained, not the last.

If the file is named differently or resides in a different path, pass the
full path as first argument to ``read_speckenv``.

Read individual values:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env

    # Standard usage:
    SETTING1 = env("SETTING1")

    # Fallback, if SETTING2 is not set (truthyness doesn't matter):
    SETTING2 = env("SETTING2", default="bla")

    # Fail hard if missing:
    SETTING3 = env("SETTING3", required=True)

    # Coerce the value before returning it (coercion is also applied to
    # default values):
    SETTING4 = env("SETTING4", coerce=bool)

The following values are evaluated as Python literals::

    BOOL=True  # And False, None etc.
    NUMBER=42
    SWEET_HOME=["localhost", "127.0.0.1"]

Additional whitespace around the equals sign is supported. Empty lines and
lines starting with a ``#`` are ignored::

    THIS_IS_IGNORED
    # COMMENTED_OUT=VALUE
    THIS = WORKS

**NOTE!** You should treat everything except for the first argument to
both ``env`` and ``read_speckenv`` as keyword-only. Since speckenv still
supports Python 2 this isn't enforced by the code right now.

It may be useful to use a mapping separate from ``os.environ``. This is
easily possible by overriding the default mapping argument:

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env, read_speckenv

    mapping = {}
    read_speckenv("file_with_variables.env", mapping=mapping)
    setting1 = env("SETTING1", mapping=mapping)


Django support
==============

speckenv comes with a few utilities for configuring Django using environment
variables. These are all pure functions without any side effects and no
dependency on their environment.

Many other projects exist which already do this but ``speckenv_django`` is
different in that it only covers interesting settings. Also, the implementation
doesn't add monkey patches to ``urllib.parse``.

speckenv doesn't depend on Django, if you don't want to use Django or the
``speckenv_django`` module you're not paying anything besides a few KiB on the
harddisk.


``django_cache_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring a Redis, locmem or dummy cache backend with optional
authentication credentials. The Redis configuration only supports Django 4 or
better. ``redis://`` and ``hiredis://`` are equivalent since recent enough
versions of redis-py automatically select the hiredis parser if it is
available.

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_cache_url

    # CACHE_URL=hiredis://localhost:6379/1/?key_prefix=example_com"
    CACHES = {"default": django_cache_url(env("DATABASE_URL", default="locmem://"))}
    # NOTE! locmem:// may be a bad default, but that's up to you really.


``django_database_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring a PostgreSQL, PostGIS or sqlite database engine with
authentication credentials.

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_database_url

    # DATABASE_URL=postgres://localhost:5432/example_com
    DATABASES = {"default": django_database_url(env("DATABASE_URL", required=True))}


``django_email_url``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Covers configuring an email backend. Known backends are ``smtp://``,
``submission://`` (same as ``smtp://`` but with TLS and a default port of 587),
``locmem://``, ``console://`` and ``dummy:``.

The utility also supports explicitly requesting SSL (``?ssl=true``), TLS
(``?tls=true``), SMTP timeouts (``?timeout=10``) and setting a
``DEFAULT_FROM_EMAIL`` address (``?_default_from_email=info@example.com``)

.. code-block:: python

    from speckenv import env
    from speckenv_django import django_email_url

    # DATABASE_URL=smtp://
    if DEBUG:
        globals().update(django_email_url(env("EMAIL_URL", default="console://")))
    else:
        globals().update(django_email_url(env("EMAIL_URL", default="smtp://")))
